Hello and
welcome to our module on talent analytics,
an important part of people analytics.
You might wonder what is talent analytics,
what is talent management?
This is something that gets talked
about in a lot of quarters.
People have different perspectives,
different definitions on this.
For our purposes today, we are going to
talk about talent analytics as talent
assessment and development.
We are interested in identifying
differences in ability.
And we're interested in
developing those abilities so
that everyone in a firm is maximized.
So this is a particular take.
You can think of it as something
deeper than performance evaluation.
We had a module on performance evaluation.
And at that point we tried to
keep everyone thinking about
employees as relatively equal.
And we're trying to understand
whether an employee is working hard or
slacking off when we think
about performance evaluation.
Now we wanna go deeper and ask about
assessing differences in employees.
This is a harder task.
It usually takes a longer time, and
there are unique challenges involved.
And so that's what the topic for
today is, employee evaluation.
We're gonna approach it from
an analytic perspective, so
we're gonna consider it talent analytics.
A motivating case for
talent analytics is promotion.
This is kind of the canonical reason
you would need to assess employability.
And this is hugely important to
firms who you put into power,
into positions of power.
Usually there are many contenders, and so
it's a challenging assessment exercise.
And adding to the difficulty is that
the measures on which you're making
this assessment are typically ambiguous.
So what are you gonna do?
And importantly how do you do this well?
This is where we're going.
This is the kind of thing we want
to tool you up to do better so
we wanna give you a few guidelines.
This is the outline for the day.
We're going to talk chiefly about
challenges involved with talent analytics.
There's some well-known
traps that people fall into.
Despite the fact that data is helpful,
data can actually exacerbate
some of these traps.
Before we leave we're going
to take a special topic,
one of unique interest in the last year or
two around tests and algorithms.
And then finally we're going
talk about some prescription,
some practical tips for
you in doing talent analytics better.
So, first up challenges, data's good.
A lot of data typically better,
but data can also be misleading.
If you're doing talent analytics,
you're probably working with data.
You're crunching numbers.
You're crunching performance evaluation,
test scores, 360 feedback, sales figures,
employee morale,
whatever you can get your hands on.
If you're resourceful,
you're probably crunching those numbers.
But what do they mean?
Before you can draw any strong inferences,
you've got to navigate a few challenges.
It's critical, in fact, it's critical
if you're going to do talent analytics
well that you navigate these challenges.
Four chiefly that we're interested in and
that we're going to focus on today.
Context, interdependence,
self-fulfilling prophecies,
and reverse causality,
each of these will be a separate segment.
And we wanna start with context.
So, it is well understood in psychology,
and increasingly understood
in organizations, that people neglect
context when evaluating performance.
We tend to believe when we see someone
perform that that performance is due to
some unique individual skill or
unique individual personality trait.
And we underestimate, we under-attribute
the situation the person was in.
So what are situational factors?
They might have had an easy task or
a difficult task.
They might have had a helpful team or
a harmful team.
They might be working in a good economy or
a bad economy.
These are very influential factors.
These are situational factors
that don't have anything to
do with whether they're a nice guy or
a bad guy, a hard worker or slacker.
These are situational factors
that we tend to underestimate
when we're trying to infer whether
this person is good at their job.
So this is so well known it's considered
the fundamental attribution error.
In psychology it's been this focus
of study for more than 40 years now.
And we know that people are inclined
to blame personality traits,
individual traits as opposed
to situational traits.
In this segment, what we're trying
to get you to do is go back and
consider situational trades,
consider the context.
When you're crunching the numbers,
you have to figure out ways to make
sure you're considering the context.
So, there's a saying in Wall Street that
is designed to help offset this bias.
The saying is,
don't confuse brains in a bull market.
What they mean by that is, in a bull
market, everybody's making money.
Everybody's trades seem to work out.
And people very readily infer
then that they are good or
that their portfolio manager,
their investment manager is good.
And these guys are saying, hey, hold on.
That was an easy situation basically.
The context was everyone made money.
So they've boiled that down to a very
pithy comment, don't confuse brains and
a bull market.
We want to build those kind of heuristics,
those helpful corrective heuristics
in the way you evaluate your talent.
So an example, a couple of examples.
We did, in the performance evaluation
module, an example of this.
So you may recall, if you've seen this
module already, that when we looked at
this extended example from the NFL of
evaluating draft picks, and in particular,
teams' ability to pick players.
Teams' ability to hire the right players,
the first thing we did was norm for
expectations as a function of
where the team was drafting.
So teams that draft high in the NFL draft
should get better players cuz there
are better players available.
Teams that draft low
should get worse players.
So we already demonstrated
this technique of norming for
expectations, and
we want to build on that here.
So what I want to do now is give you a new
example also from the world of sports, but
one that is especially designed to convey
this context idea especially well.
So this is from American baseball, and
mid 20th century American baseball,
and it's comes to us from Bill James.
Bill James wrote about
this in one of his books.
And it's a comparison of two second
basemen, interesting for a few reasons.
They played at about the same time.
This is Bobby Doerr of the Boston Red Sox
and Joe Gordon of the New York Yankees.
They played about the same time.
They played the same position.
They were both from Southern California.
And they were both very successful.
But after their careers,
one was much more lauded than the other.
Bobby Doerr went on to Hall of Fame
election quite readily and was considered,
with the passing of years was considered
the better of the two players.
Joe Gordon,
who at the time had been well considered,
slipped significantly behind
Bobby Doerr and in fact wasn't elected
to the Hall of Fame until Bill James
started this campaign and this analysis.
So let's dig into the numbers.
Much as you might dig into numbers as
you decide who to promote in your firm,
let's dig into the numbers and
see what they tell us and
what mistakes we could fall
into if we're not careful.
I'm going to show you some baseball stats.
And it doesn't matter if
you understand baseball.
All that matters in a few key
columns higher is better.
You can think of this as
sales in your organization.
You can think of this as employee morale.
You can think of this as 360
degree feedback, whatever.
This is a performance measure for these
two players, Bobby Doerr and Joe Gordon.
What I'm showing you are their batting
statistics in their home ballpark.
So they spent half of their careers
essentially in their home ballpark.
And then they spend the other half
on the road playing away games.
What's interesting about these two
characters is that they played their home
ballparks were quite different.
So Bobby Doerr played at Fenway,
a small hitter friendly park.
Joe Gordon played in Yankee Stadium,
famously cavernous,
not as friendly to hitters.
What do you see?
Well, if you look across the key
stats are Doerr had more home runs.
He had quite a bit more hits, more home
runs, more RBIs, which is runs batted in.
Overall, his average was a little higher.
His on base percentage
was a little higher.
His slugging percentage, across
the board he's better in his home park.
But, we've already said they're
batting in very different places.
In other words, the context isn't
the same for these two guys.
If we want to evaluate them, we need
to put them on a level playing field.
We need to make sure
it's apples to apples.
And the best way to do that is to look
at the other half of their record,
the other half being where they are,
what they do in the visitor park.
So what does that look like?
Here the story is very different.
Doerr still has more hits because
in fact he has more at bats.
But he has significantly fewer home runs,
significantly fewer runs batted in,
a worse batting average,
a worse on base percentage average, and
a lower slugging percentage.
Across the board he
performs worse than Gordon,
even though the line looked very different
when you were looking at his home park.
This, though, is where we've
contextualized the performance.
This is where it's a level playing field.
And if you don't break it out like this,
if you only look at their career numbers,
you don't get this picture.
And you think they're about the same or
maybe think Bobby Doerr's better.
When you contextualize the performance,
when you say how do they compare when
they're on a level playing field,
it's quite clear that Joe Gordon
was the better batter.
By the way they were known
both as good fielders.
This is what really distinguished them.
Once Bill James made this case,
he broke out the stats in this way,
in other words he contextualized
their performance.
He made a strong argument for
Joe Gordon making the Hall of Fame.
And in fact because of Bill James
he was elected to the Hall of Fame.
This is the kind of promotion
decision we want your firms to make.
We want you to avoid the mistakes
that the Hall of Fame made for years.
We want you to add this kind of context.
So another quick example
a more recent sporting event,
the World Cup a year and
a half ago now in 2014.
There was a match where the U.S. was beat
by Belgium I believe and beat handily.
In that match the U.S.
goalie Tim Howard faced an unprecedented
number of shots on the goal.
He let two goals in, and so it might
not look that strong a performance.
But in the context of what he faced,
it turned out to be
an extraordinary performance.
And Nate Silver,
Nate Silver of ESPN's 538,
famously for forecasting US elections
did a little analysis after this game,
after the whole World Cup
as a matter of fact.
And said who in the World Cup
performed best?
Who was the best goalie during
this particular sporting event?
And he named Howard's performance
actually, against Belgium.
Despite having let in two goals,
he said that when you contextualize
his performance, it was the best.
Considering what he faced,
he faced 16 shots on goal.
16 shots on goal, he would have expected,
if you just ask across all matches,
all goalies, all teams,
when someone faces 16 shots on goal,
how many goals would you
expect them to allow?
And then the answer's four and half.
What did he allow?
He only allowed two.
So he actually gained as a goalie,
his performance was to gain two and
a half goals.
That's a very different take on his
performance than that he let in two goals,
but it's a more contextually
appropriate take.
So only by considering
the context of his performance
can we actually understand
how good it actually was.
And once we do that we
can differentiate Howard
from the other good goal performances
we saw in the World Cup.
So in general,
this is what we're pushing you to do.
And it's gonna look different
in each firm, in each industry.
But you've gotta find ways to make
the performance evaluations, the employee
evaluations is really what we're
talking about here, apples to apples.
You've got to find ways to
level the playing field.
The most general way to think about this
is performance relative to expectations.
What would the performance have been,
what does it look like
relative to expectations?
This might be driven by the person's team,
by the product he or
she is in charge of,
by the industry they are participating in,
by the broader economy,
by the person's boss.
All of these are factors that might in
some circumstances make a big difference
in how they perform.
You've got to norm for that.
You've got to control for
that in some way.
In order to compare person A working for
one boss to person B working for
a different boss,
you've got to somehow adjust for
that boss' effect on their performance.
This is context.
This is something we know
people don't do very well.
And it's critical to
good talent analytics.